hey everyone Laszlo Montgomery again
part four of our cultural revolution
overview a free public service from all
of us here at the China history podcast
as we begin part four Chairman Mao has
already silenced history tractors within
an inch of their lives and by the time
mile stands before million admirers at
this first big rally of the Cultural
Revolution on August 18 1966 the whole
mass movement is often running at this
point if anyone had any second thoughts
about what was about to happen they kept
it to themselves
this was terra incognita as far as this
founding generation of the PRC leaders
were concerned for all intents and
purposes China beginning with the cities
was taking a timeout to engage in
revolution and practice class struggle
after most leaders and cadres saw that
Mao wasn't kidding around they jumped
right onto that departing bandwagon and
acted like cheerleaders for the movement
everyone had to be involved in this
thing either on one side or the other
and even those who were all on board
they still had grave doubts about
turning all the young Red Guards loose
and encouraging them to carry out
no-holds-barred class struggle to root
out revisionists capitalist rotors and
any anti-party anti Mao elements
wherever they could be found this is the
order that went out the order went out
this way using the 16 points the Charter
for the Cultural Revolution now those in
authority had to be careful to strike
the precise balance of encouraging the
Red Guards to smash the four olds but
they also had to make sure not to carry
it too far where order and Society would
break down the 16 points did say in so
many words you know do not cross certain
boundaries well what was about to happen
when so above and beyond what was
intended I don't know did my intend for
it to be like this
however the call to rebel struggle and
smash was meant to go out the way it was
heard
seemed loud and clear to the Red Guards
and cultural revolution opportunists not
only was this going to be easy it was
gonna be fun and entertaining and
self-satisfying in a whole number of
ways the Red Guards embraced mouths
words and what is there to say all hell
broke loose when you hear about the
horrors of the Cultural Revolution when
you read all these works of fiction and
nonfiction that concern the Cultural
Revolution books like John Rome's a Wild
Swans jam chilies red scarf girl on Chi
Minh's red Azalea and a hundred others
in English and Chinese there were so
many stories that were terrifying and
tragic could have been you or me
suddenly you faced the horror that a
bunch of kids could legally break into
your house pull you out of your home and
onto a stage in front of thousands of
onlookers maybe your neighbors people
you knew and everyone is screaming for
blood and in front of everybody you
could face a a physical and mental
beating that sometimes killed people and
if they wanted to find some way to
humiliate you anything was fair game and
even if it was something that might scar
you for decades no one took a second
thought whether to do it or not people
got roughed up in the most traumatizing
ways and so many were led to suicide
your entire life could be ravaged in a
moment and all the while as you were led
away to face an uncertain struggle
session on some makeshift stage your
place of residence could be raided and
anything that fell under the
far-reaching umbrella of the four olds
was smashed burned or looted whatever
and if they wanted to red guards could
have you sent down to go back to your
village where your ancestors came from
before liberation or even a hundred
years ago almost two percent of the
population of Beijing faced getting
uprooted from their homes and sent out
of the city when anyone asks me what was
so bad about the Cultural Revolution
that was it if you fell into any number
of categories of people you were fair
game to be taken down
during these two terrible months of
August September 1966 it happened thirty
3695 times just in Beijing alone and in
Shanghai a place you know where more
people had even more nice stuff eighty
four thousand two hundred twenty two
homes of people who fit the bill had to
endure this terror of a red guard home
invasion and in Shanghai what happened
this this was just during a period of a
little more than a couple weeks
gold silver Jade any valuables were fair
game didn't matter if your great-grandma
had something that had been handed down
to you from her great-grandma from the
time of kanga she in an instant a family
momento was destroyed or confiscated for
someone else to hand down one day to
their progeny tons and tons of gold and
silver was looted from people's homes
all over Hong Kong by the way an avid
art collector of the highest order
he cleaned up during these early days of
the four olds his agents kept their eyes
open for any good paintings scrolls rare
books and whatnot
and let me say although a lot of people
survived thanks to their relationship
with Joanne Lai even premier Joe
couldn't save everyone yeah if you were
someone who might see eye to eye with
whatever lil Shao Qi or thunk Hsiao
paying might say or think first came the
knowledge that something not good was
about to go down
then the next thing you knew one person
after another day in day out you'd hear
about this one getting after that one
getting it and you knew your day was
coming and no matter how hard you might
try to be totally on board with this
Cultural Revolution thing when August
September 1966 came along if you had any
kind of skeleton in your closet if it
were found out you were in for a rough
time possibly facing the kind of
treatment that I just described or you
might face death or the death of loved
ones
Chairman Mao was thinking if you turn
the heat up all the way and turn these
Red Guards loose
they'd rid the whole party of any
revisionists and anyone even
contemplating taking the capitalist road
what Mao didn't think of was that as
things progressed it was also the
perfect environment to go settle scores
with whoever he had a beef with in your
government department your factory your
school your your schools administration
throughout the universities in your own
neighborhoods local party committees
almost everyone was vulnerable in one
form or another in August September 1966
it was a scary time and this was when
the Cultural Revolution was at a fever
pitch and all the most horrific excesses
that you've all heard about started to
happen and in a big way Chairman Mao
made it loud and clear he didn't mince
words about what could or couldn't be
done so now that all the Red Guards had
carte blanch they went to work learning
revolution by making revolution now poor
lil Shao Qi he hadn't been taken down
yet
Mao keeps him to lead the charge against
his one-time comrades and allies so
following the first big rally in
Tiananmen on August 18th was rally the
very next day in Shanghai there followed
another rally the second one in Beijing
on August 31st
this one was MC by Gen Ching so she got
to be the center of attention and I bet
she was in hog heaven standing up there
and tiananmen gates you know of course
you know people were there for her
husband but she got to stand before them
and get them excited and get a chance to
bask in Mao's glory
and one of the funny things that happen
Lin pl
he was always a total wreck because of
his many illnesses most of them
imaginary he didn't like to be outdoors
and if any of the stories are true and
mind you he isn't here to defend himself
and he had a lot of enemies but it said
the feel of the wind blowing on against
his skin just freaked him out he didn't
like that water - he was afraid of water
or at least the
sites of the water you know like the
open sea anyways he had all these
supposed phobias and it's only natural
that the history books mention these
things so you'd think he'd hate these
huge outdoor red guard rallies but in
fact limpio love these things it was
like once they all got bitten by that
bug once you got the taste of waving to
a million people all screaming and
getting caught up in the moment and you
know being who they were top government
leaders who can resist that feeling so
limpio he was always very animated at
these things on September 15th there was
another big rally in Beijing the usual
massive crowd this one was emceed by
none other than the so-called godfather
of a Cultural Revolution Con Chun
normally he was very laid-back sinister
hanging in the shadows do your worst
damage from behind the scenes kind of
guy but here he was right up in front
center stage right at the podium making
speeches waving to the crowd you know
the Red Guards cheering and screaming
out their slogans and showing their
approval then came the National Day
rally the fourth one this one was a
little scary Mao came up with the great
idea to go do a meet-and-greet with the
crowd which you know for National Day
was about one and a half million strong
bad idea turned out to be they the
entourage driving the leaders to
Tiananmen Square was totally overwhelmed
by the massive crowd just picture the
Beatles at the height of Beatle mania
just driving out at Times Square in New
York and a limo on a Saturday night well
that's what happened a mall and the
security detail that day barely got the
Chairman and his fellow famosos out of
Tiananmen Square alive after they were
all safely inserted inside the Forbidden
City behind locked gates it said that
Mao exclaimed we're gonna carry the
great proletarian Cultural Revolution
through to the end if it comes down to
it we'll all go down together by
November
the last of the eight rallies was held
200 thousand people a day had been
rotating in and out of Beijing they they
rode the trains for free and all the
logistics were left to the PLA in the
Ministry of Railways a lot of people
were on the go you had all these people
from all points north south east and
west in China taking the Hajj to Beijing
to go attend these rallies and visits
where the center of the world was well
their world at least and not just
Beijing the Red Guards traveled all over
the country for the people of Beijing
this was a massive disruption as you
could imagine at its worst point there
were three million more people in
Beijing than the usual at the time 7.7
million so imagine the strain on
resources for hygiene for eating for
sleeping there was a lot of hooliganism
and destruction of public property that
added to the woes of city officials
trying to blend into the Cultural
Revolution and also at the same time
keep the wheels from falling off the bus
you know when you're in your 20s you
could bunk down almost anywhere it ain't
no thing the unexpected consequences of
so many millions on the go all the time
led to all kinds of unexpected tragedies
the PLA made sure there were food
rations for everyone and mind you it
wasn't anything to write home about
there wasn't any home shower room
typically the PLA issued grub for
everyone was you know for breakfast you
got rice water pickles and a steamed bun
lunch was - steamed buns a dish of
cabbage and maybe some pork these
hundreds of thousands of people
converged at Beijing and they were met
at the bus stations and train stations
by a red guard reception center you know
sort of like the USO and all the US
airports and there they get whatever
information they needed about what was
going on you know in those Manning these
centers and they were everywhere would
direct the people you know where to go
by the
of the last rally on November 26 1966
between 11 to 12 million Red Guards had
come to Beijing at one time or another
and can now go back to their own cities
and counties with stories that they saw
Chairman Mao and heard him speak not
everyone went to Beijing but if you were
young you didn't have any school and if
you had a fraction of wanderlust your
moment had come
Red Guards and anyone caught up in the
moment who wanted to go out on an
adventure this was the time and it was
an amazing chance for people who you
know had no chance of ever getting out
of their city or village let alone that
province to hit the road they could get
you know three squares a day free travel
and accommodation and the government
picked up the tab and the cult of MA was
burning white hot at this time so the
most popular destinations were you know
the revolutionary mecca's of yen on Chu
Yi Jing Gong Xiang and Xiao Qiang and
any place that could you know brag of
some past association with the life of
Mao Zedong in China today there are a
million diaries and memories filled with
all the stories of this time some
romantics some sad some tragic if you
were born say in the years immediately
after the end of World War two and you
know around the Korean War you were the
perfect Red Guard age
so between rooting out revisionists and
capitalist rotors learning revolution by
carrying out revolution getting even
with your enemies and getting the chance
to see the country there was also this
whole business about destroying the four
holes I already mentioned about this
with regard to one's personal treasures
and mementos from their past but more
than the personal valuables and
keepsakes of the Chinese people fell
victim to the four holes China you know
being a multi millennia old civilization
had a lot of cultural and historical
buildings
people's works of art cultural relics
that fell under the broad categories of
the four olds what we saw the Taliban do
in March 2001 when mullah omar called
for the destruction of the buddhas at
Bamiyan you had the same sort of
mentality in china amongst those who
were particularly enthusiastic about
smashing the four olds for the Taliban
they did what they did in the name of
Islam when Buddhist temples and statues
were destroyed during the for olds
campaign it was done in the name of
Chairman Mao in such an ancient and
historic city as Beijing at the time
there were six thousand eight hundred
and forty-three places that were
officially designated by the state as
places of cultural and historical
interest about seventy percent of these
places got trashed early on premier Joe
and I saw what could possibly happen he
did what he could calling many places
off-limits to red guards with no
exceptions you know of course there was
the Forbidden City no one was allowed to
go in same thing with the Great Hall of
the People the Galliard High guesthouse
various government ministry buildings
all organs of communication stayed in
the hands of the party and no one was
allowed to take those over or even go
there but not everything was protected
thanks to Chen Botha and others in the
central Cultural Revolution group CCR G
the whole Chu fool complex in Shandong
the home of Confucius was completely
trashed was this China's most sacred
ground maybe maybe not by the time the
Red Guards finished with toufool 929
paintings 2700 books 1000 stone steelies
and 2,000 graves were destroyed
desecrated burned those red guards sure
taught Confucius a lesson
I remember high-grade Wuhan wrote the
play that sort of lit the fuse to the
explosions that we're all going off now
hide raise grave on high not
Island was dug up and desecrated and
destroyed books and libraries everywhere
were destroyed public private university
libraries I used to be associated with
this organization in LA called medical
books for China a great and giving man
dr. Jordan Phillips who passed away in
July of 2008 he set up this organization
to ship containers and containers of
medical books and journals to China to
help in the restoration of many of these
university medical libraries that were
destroyed by the Red Guards during the
Cultural Revolution government officials
all over China had to pick and choose
what was fair game to be destroyed in
their own towns if you tried to protect
too much then you found yourself on the
wrong end of a struggle session so all
these officials had to figure out what
was okay for the Red Guards to trash and
what was hands-off and as the Red Guard
smashed the four olds attended these
rallies travelled throughout the country
all those who could be classified in one
form or another as Mouse opponents in
spectacles everywhere all these party
officials from punchin Punda why boy oh
boy
anyone all the way down to the smallest
local official they went through a whole
gauntlet of humiliations as they face
the fury of the Red Guards and everyone
else out for a little entertainment
courtesy of the CCR G you see if you
were gonna go after some party big fish
you needed the approval of the CCR G
first mile call the meeting in October
to sort of get a time stamp on the
Cultural Revolution discuss how it was
going so far and how to keep them
maintain the momentum and what became
known as the central work conference of
October 9th to 28th it was here where
Leo Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping had to
stand before everyone and criticize
themselves show mounds of contrition and
basically say if they had only more
strictly followed Mao's thought and
consulted them more often these mistakes
they committed never would
they really had to take it full in the
face as far as you know how they handled
the matter of these work teams back in
June and July starting from right about
here Leo and dung became fair game to be
attacked by named C up until now at
least out on the streets and outside the
Central Committee although they were
attacked regularly it had only been
obliquely everyone knew who the
criticism was directed against but no
one was saying their names or daring to
write their names and big character
poster attacks that was until now at the
end of 1966 on December 9th came the ten
points on industry that basically
invited all the workers to join in on
the Cultural Revolution and to parrot
what their student comrades have been
doing for almost half a year then a week
later came the ten points on rural
villages that did the same thing to
everyone else out in the countryside so
with these two John FFA's or central
party directives the workers and
peasants were turned loose and invited
to carry out the same kind of rebellion
violence and destruction that had
already been carried out by the student
Red Guards so as the extremely
tumultuous year in China of 1966 comes
to an end Mao has now unleashed what
amounts to the entire population of
China to stop everything they're doing
it just carry out revolution and class
struggle
oh man in theory this looked good at
least a mile Chairman Mao had faith that
this was all gonna work out well just
like he envisioned others saw the
beginning of the end of China what
happened was you know something in
between and out of control Red Guard
movement had its uses to those in the
CCR G the Red Guards always proved to be
excellent surrogates for the CCR G
members who would use the young students
to go do their dirty work
one early example of this concerns the
61 renegades you might recall this group
from the boy a boy episode
bawwww-- was amongst this group of 61
young communists who in 1928 were
captured by the nationalism thrown into
a KMT prison in Tianjin to make a long
story short neo Xiao Qi took charge of
this matter back in the 1930s and was
somehow able to negotiate with the KMT
authorities to get the release of all 61
but in order to secure their release in
1936 they all had to first swear their
allegiance to the Communists and
communism you know and say a bunch of
negative things a radical red guard
detachment in Tianjin uncovered this
matter and brought it to the attention
of the CCR G some within the CCR G most
of all Cong hung were delighted to
obtain this quality red meat brought to
them by these ten gene Red Guards they
knew a good thing when they saw it
amongst these 61 renegades or traitors
were guys like ball yeehaw so not only
was this matter of the 61 renegades a
good way to take a huge swipe at yo Xiao
Qi and his most vulnerable but it was
also a chance to knock down known
capitalist rotors like Bowie Baugh who
had been involved in China's finances
and economic planning since day one
kung hyung Jun Ching and their enablers
were able to twist this whole thing you
know regarding what Leo Shao Qi did to
get these guys freed you know on the
surface of it he made a bunch of
promises to the KMT you know that he
never intended to keep and you know made
his guys sign these documents or
whatever in the bottom line they were
all freed and lived to fight on for the
revolution but Kong hung he was a clever
guy he was able to show that all along
these 61 were no good and the most
no-good of all was Leo Shao Qi who used
his power not only to get them released
but also to place many of them in very
sensitive positions of power in the
party the government in short yeah you
get the picture and for this reason the
brave boy boy if you remember from
episode 8 he was struggle
against at workers Stadium but didn't
back down in the face of these
accusations well you know the matter of
the 61 renegades was simply another nail
in the oh she's coffin which already had
hundreds of nails in it already in early
1967 it was looking like it was only a
matter of time before the final nail got
pounded in already in January even a
place such as Chung nan hai wasn't even
safe Red Guards were allowed to go in
harass the leaders and paint Pro mile
slogans on their residences and pasted
dots of balls all around denouncing them
for you know whatever they felt like
even the most sacred of sacred cows
Judah even marshal Judah miles oldest
comrade from the very beginning the
founder of the PLA even he was pushed
around and harassed Tung Xiao ping
wasn't faring too well either but we all
know what happened to him and when he
what he went on to do after the Cultural
Revolution was over but it was right
about now though in early 1967 that
someone dug up his post Great Leap
Forward 1962 quip that basically said
you know it doesn't matter what color
the cat is as long as it catches mice so
he got nailed for that yeah a hundred
other things both Lille and dung were at
a terrible pressure their lives were
completely in Mao's hands they were
manhandled and humiliated of course but
no one could put the knife in until Mao
gave the thumbs up or the thumbs down yo
and dung were the two biggest fish and
what ultimately happened to them was
purely for Mao Zedong and no one else to
decide early 1967 this is when all the
endless denunciations began to gather
momentum this was the terrible Perry
when anyone who was caught up in the
dragnet got dragged unceremoniously
onstage kicked in the ass in front of a
crowd of 10,000 screaming and hysterical
locals you know the dunce hat would be
on the sign around the neck and the
iconic props of the Cultural Revolution
you know they all came out and as I said
many died during the carrying out to
these atrocities if you were lined up on
the wrong side of Mao this was your fate
if you had something in your past that
was dug up or if someone ratted you out
for some remark you made eight years ago
this was possibly your fate - this was a
golden time to get back at any and all
officials colleagues or enemies who
weren't popular who were considered you
know not revolutionary enough yet all
these various Red Guard groups some were
elite groups that had access to the CCR
G some not so well connected but they
were extremely well organized and when
the CCR Chi top brass sat in there do
you tie villas and schemed about you
know who should be next all they had to
do was whisper in the airs of any number
of red guard organizations to go get you
know so-and-so and give it to him good
and the next thing you know you know he
was up in front of 50 or a hundred
thousand people with a sign around his
neck getting airplane for his alleged
crimes against Chairman Mao these were
the days with John Chiang thoroughly in
charge of the levers that controlled the
flow of art and culture and to the lives
of the law by Shing the only stuff
anyone got to see were the revolutionary
operas and movies that did won'ting one
thing glorify Mao and everything he
stood for these were the days when if
you were a woman and you know what was
good for you you are flat shoes a green
red guard style uniform with matching
jacket and baggy trousers and of course
the same kind of army cap that mal wore
then you finished off your own song with
las dos necesitas a mile badge of some
sort and your own copy of Lin Qiao's
great work to the glorification of his
benefactor the little red book 1967 the
year of the Sheep
the most powerful people in China were
Mao Lin Bo Joe Enlai and the elite
of the ccr G this was Chen hua Kang
Chang Chang Ching Wong Lee Kuan Fung
Ching bun Yu Jiang twin Xiao and yaw
when you're in the ccr G at this point
early 1967 was determining policy for
all of China the scope of their
authority knew almost no bounds because
they were controlled by Mao and derived
their power prestige and authority from
their relationship with them so they had
their hand on almost every lever in the
government the functioning bureaucracies
of China we can say what you want to say
about them but they no longer worked and
had been taken over in the seizure of
power by the CCR G things really went
from bad to worse once the military got
thrown into the fray after it became
okay to go after capitalist rotors in
the army all-out Civil War erupted you
had Red Guard units fighting against
local army units and Garrison's it's
right about now where the Red Guards
start splitting up into factions and
began to savage each other and carry out
all kinds of outrageous acts to you know
prove their revolutionary stripes and
curry favor with the CCR G one of the
most obvious splits took place between
the initial red guard groups you know
who were all I guess you could call them
the elite in a way they were all you
know the Ching hua and Peking University
types from and from other leading
universities of the day they provided
the initial leadership and the movement
but later on when things really took off
in August 1966 after everyone else all
over the place had been invited to jump
on the red guard bandwagon these new red
guards began to challenge the original
elite red guards of the movement the
stories go on and on forever about these
heady days and all that crazy and
outlandish things that the red guards
did to display their commitment and
devotion to Mao and the whole revolution
these were the days of no me attached I
I'm gonna share that Ching when Mao
directed every
in agriculture to learn from the model
commune of dachi in Shaanxi and in
industry to learn from the country's
greatest oil producer at dachi
in february 1967 and a sign that yeah I
had to be careful committing your life
to a guy like Chairman Mao he growled
loudly at a Politburo meeting on the
10th where his criticism was directed at
Chen hua Jiang Ching first he pounces on
Chen hua carrying out activities that
tried to split the unity of the
Politburo and then right in front of
everyone he shows his wife who's boss
when he tells her she's someone who
quote who has grandiose aims but puny
abilities great ambition but little
talent and he didn't stop there right on
the heels of the leftist total and
complete seizure of the Shanghai party
and government the two leaders jang
junseo and yawen un got called up to
Beijing to get a dressing down by the
Chairman and it's right about now that
another of the great Cultural Revolution
rogues makes his debut onto the national
scene in the next episode we'll look at
Wang Hong won a hot-headed firebrand
leftist of a radical if there ever was
one he was a nobody of a worker who made
a lot of noise during a particular
incident in Shanghai and got himself
noticed and was helicoptered into the
inner circles of the CC RG and I kid you
not towards the end of the Cultural
Revolution he was a number three guy in
all of China with only MA and Joe out
ranking him so Wang Hong when ladies and
gentlemen will look at him next week
he held a 25% shareholding and the gang
of four with John Chang Jiang twin CEO
and yell when you're in holding the
remaining 75% stake we have so far to go
still we made some progress today we're
into 1967 which my descriptions can
hardly do justice the Cultural
Revolution these days is a pretty
well-documented period in modern Chinese
history all those red
guards of yesteryear or today in their
late 50s and well into their 60s so next
time we're together we'll see how this
whole thing immediately spun out of
control and when Mao could have taken
his hand off the throttle he just goes
and revs the engine and now it's not
even a year later and you have red guard
factions galore beating on each other
slowing down the wheels of progress
affecting the economy and total daily
life in China the army is not in very
good shape and when they get invited
into the fray the fighting gets bloodier
and the politics of the period get more
complicated his 1967 progressed Mao knew
this whole thing wasn't working out like
he originally envisioned it
it seemed despite everything he did to
encourage it he didn't expect that
everything would fall apart like it did
and that the Red Guards would all turn
on each other you know causing more harm
than good so when we resume this
Cultural Revolution overview we'll see
mouse starting to think of some sort of
exit strategy and turn the heat down a
few notches as the Chairman finds out
and like every leader of every political
party and nation and on earth figures
out sooner or later when you invite the
extremists into your world anything
could happen and whatever it is you
probably live to regret it
and so it was in this case but Mao he
was such a kidder when he went on the
attack against the CCR G leaders in
February he was only doing this to
emboldened those who were against the
acts carried out by the CCR G to speak
out you know which they did Cheung Yee
she's young Chan Tai Chan Lin and others
they thought Mao was coming to his
senses but in a classic Mao move they
fell right into his trap and before you
could say dong Fang Hong the CCR Chi was
back in power and badder than ever and
those who spoke up and went against the
current they got nailed and it was now
when Chang Ching did what she had been
no doubt dreaming about doing for the
longest time it was now when she felt
secure enough to go after one Guang Mei
glamorous and charismatic wife of Leo
Shao Qi and as we'll see in the next
episode
finally Leo Shao Qi gets his first taste
of physical violence and when he goes to
Chairman Mao one last time and begs for
mercy his old comrade from Hunan turns
his back on him and they never meet
again so that's all I have for you today
this is Laszlo Montgomery leaving you
once again for my very own man cave here
in beautiful sunny Claremont California
nine 171 one I hope you'll join me next
time for another exciting episode of the
China history podcast